---
title: Brief Introduction to R
layout: post
category: coding
---
p<>. R is a scripting language for statistical data manipulation and analysis getting popularity in recent years. The open-source nature means it’s easy to get help from user community, and lots of new packages get contributed by users. Though the R language bears all characteristics of a programming language, to grasp the core of it should suffice for most usage scenario. This article is a brief introduction to the five most frequently-used R data structures: 

<div class="blog-post-contents">
    * "vector":#vct
    * "matrix":#mx
    * "list":#lst
    * "data.frame":#df
    * "factor":#fct
</div>

p<>. We shall browser through them one by one.

<h4 id=vct>__**Vector**__</h4>

p<>. Objects are actually considered one-element vectors, so there is really no such thing as a scalar:

bc.. > 1
[1] 1

p<>. A vector is frequently declared by the primitive function __c__():

bc.. > vct <- c(1,2)
> vct
[1] 1 2 

p<>. Vector elements must be of the same mode, and the output mode of __c__() is determined by the highest mode of the components in the mode hierarchy NULL < raw < logical < integer < double < complex < character < list < expression:

bc.. > vct <- c(as.integer(1), 1)
> storage.mode(vct)
[1] "double"

p<>. Also, function __c__() works to flat recursive structures:

bc.. > vct <- c(c(1,2), 3)
> vct
[1] 1 2 3

p<>. It's worth your attention that operators and functions in R language work in a element-wise fashion based on the vector, such as:

bc.. > ifelse(c(1,2,3,4) %% 2 == 0, 'even', 'odd')
[1] "odd"  "even" "odd"  "even"

p<>. Shorter vectors would be recursively completed so as to have same length. So

bc.. > c(1,2,3,4) %% 2 == 0 
[1] FALSE  TRUE FALSE  TRUE

p<>. is actually

bc. > c(1,2,3,4) %% c(2,2,2,2) == c(0,0,0,0)
[1] FALSE  TRUE FALSE  TRUE

<h4 id=mx>__**Matrix**__</h4>

p<>. An array is a vector with the "dim" attribute. A two-dimensional array is called matrix, which is eligible for usual matrix mathematical operations. For instance:

bc.. > mx <- matrix(1:9, nrow=3, ncol=3)
> mx
     [,1] [,2] [,3]
[1,]    1    4    7
[2,]    2    5    8
[3,]    3    6    9

> mx %*% mx
     [,1] [,2] [,3]
[1,]   30   66  102
[2,]   36   81  126
[3,]   42   96  150

p<>. One could select a slice of a matrix with a vector as the row indices and column indices:

bc.. > mx[c(1,2), c(1,3)]
     [,1] [,2]
[1,]    1    7
[2,]    2    8

p<>. While, if one selects a single row or column from a matrix, something undesirable happends:

bc.. > r <- mx[1,]
> attributes(r)
NULL

p<>. The return is no longer a matrix. To avoid this, one could sepcify the "drop" parameter:

bc.. > r <- mx[1, , drop=FALSE]
> attributes(r)
$dim
[1] 1 3

p<>. Than, r is still a matrix.

<h4 id=lst>__**List**__</h4>

p<>. Other than the vector or matrix whose elements are of the same mode, list is prettey much like C **struct**. The components of a list could have distinct modes. One may initiate a list in this way:

bc.. > lst <- list(name="Joe", salary=55000)
> lst
$name
[1] "Joe"

$salary
[1] 55000

p<>. Elements of a list can be accessed by [['elmt name']] or [[elmt index]]:

bc.. > lst[['name']]
[1] "Joe"

> lst[[1]]
[1] "Joe"

p<>. To get a slice of a list, substitute ['elmt name'] or [elmt index] with a vector of element names or indices:

bc.. > lst[c('name','salary')]
$name
[1] "Joe"

$salary
[1] 55000

> lst[c(1,2)]
$name
[1] "Joe"

$salary
[1] 55000

p<>. The reture is still a list:

bc. > class(lst[1])
[1] "list"

<h4 id=df>__**Data.frame**__</h4>

p<>. A data.frame is in fact a list with list components as the data.frame columns. So the declaration is very much like that of a list:

bc.. > df <- data.frame(name=c('gong', 'gonggong'), age=c(25, 25))
> df
      name age
1     gong  25
2 gonggong  25

p<>. Likewise, we are allowed to access columns of a data.frame as we access components of a list:

bc.. > df['name']
      name
1     gong
2 gonggong

> df[c(1,2)]
      name age
1     gong  25
2 gonggong  25

> df[['name']]
[1] gong     gonggong
Levels: gong gonggong

p<>. Note that the return in the 3rd instance is a factor instead of a data.frame. Besides, elements of the data.frame can be accessed in a matrix-like fasion, such as retriving specific lines:

bc.. > df[1, ]
  name age
1 gong  25

p<>. In R language, the vectorized programming style is prefered to the iterative style. The function __lapply__() helps to applied a function to each column of a data.frame, or say, each componont of a list.

bc.. df <- data.frame(age=c(25, 27), salary=c(100, 200))
> df
  age salary
1  25    100
2  27    200

> lapply(df, mean)
$age
[1] 26

$salary
[1] 150

p<>. The return is a list containing result of each column.

<h4 id=fct>__**Factor**__</h4>

p<>. We can encode a vector as a factor whose elements are of categorical type, called "levels". Once a factor is declared, its levels attribute can't be changed. So you are not allowed to assign a value which is not in the levels to a element of the factor:

bc.. > fct <- factor(c('a','b','c','c','b'))
> fct
[1] a b c c b
Levels: a b c

> fct[1] <- 'd'
Warning message:
In `[<-.factor`(`*tmp*`, 1, value = "d") :
  invalid factor level, NA generated

p<>. The @fct@ has three distinct values 'a', 'b' and 'c', hence @Levels: a b c@. So, to assign 'd' to @fct[1]@ is invalid because 'd' is not a level of @fct@.

p<>. Typically, the factor is used for grouping a bunch of values and applying functions to the groups respectively:

bc.. > salary <- c(100, 200, 150, 250)

> profession <- factor(c("teacher", "teacher", "teacher", "engineer"))
> profession
[1] teacher  teacher  teacher  engineer
Levels: engineer teacher

> gender <- factor(c('male', 'female', 'male', 'female'))
> gender
[1] male   female male   female
Levels: female male

> tapply(salary, list(profession, gender), mean)
         female male
engineer    250   NA
teacher     200  125

p<>. There are four people whose salary, profession and gender are listed subsequently. @profession@ and @gender@ are factor classes so that function __tapply__() could divide four people by their profession and gender, then calculate the mean salary within each group.
